\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename otts-say.info
@settitle Say client to OpenTTS
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@set VERSION 1.0

@dircategory Sound

@direntry
* Say for OpenTTS: (otts-say).       Say.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Say for OpenTTS: (otts-say)
@author Hynek Hanke <@email{hanke@@freebsoft.org}>
@author Steve Holmes <@email{steve.holmes88@@gmail.com}>
@author OpenTTS Developers <@email{opentts-dev@@lists.opentts.org}>

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

This manual documents Say for OpenTTS, version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002, 2003, 2006 Brailcom, o.p.s.

Copyright @copyright{} 2010 OpenTTS Developers

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end quotation

@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top,  , (dir), (dir)

This manual documents Say for OpenTTS, version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002, 2003, 2006 Brailcom, o.p.s.

Copyright @copyright{} 2010 OpenTTS Developers

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no
Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included
in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
@end quotation
@end ifnottex

@ifhtml
@heading Say for OpenTTS
@end ifhtml

@chapter General

@code{otts-say} is a very simple client for OpenTTS that takes some text from the
command line and some simple parameters and passes them to OpenTTS
for synthesis. The resulting synthesized speech is then played on your speakers.
It can also be used for stopping and cancelling speech on OpenTTS.

Usage: @code{otts-say [options] ["some text"]}


@table @code
@item -r or --rate
Set the rate of the speech (between -100 and +100, default see below).
@item -p or --pitch
Set the pitch of the speech (between -100 and +100, default see below).
@item -i or --volume
Set the volume (intensity) of the speech (between -100 and +100, default see below).
@item -o or --output-module
Set the output module.  Default see below.
@item -l or --language
Set the language. The parameter is an iso language code, like @code{en} or @code{cs}.
Default see below.
@item -t or --voice-type
Set the prefered voice type (male1, male2, male3, female1, female2,
female3, child_male, child_female).
@item -m or --punctuation-mode
Set the punctuation mode (none, some, all).  Default see below.
@item -s or --spelling
Spell the message.
@item -x or --ssml
Set SSML mode on (default: off).  The text contains SSML markup.
@item -e or --pipe-mode
Set pipe mode on (default: off).  Reads text from stdin, writes to stdout, and also
sends to OpenTTS.
@item -w or --wait
Wait till the end of speaking the message. In this mode, otts-say returns only after
the message is fully spoken on the speakers or after it gets discarded.
@item -S or --stop
Stop the previous message in OpenTTS (regardless of the client who sent
it and it's priority) before saying the specified message. If no message is specified,
it just performs the stop function.
@item -C or --cancel
Similar to @code{-S}, but it stops (cancels) all the messages in all the queues in
OpenTTS. Use this for total stop of speech.
@item -v or --version
Print version and copyright info.
@item -h or --help
Print a short help message.
@end table

Defaults for rate, pitch, and volume are determined by @code{DefaultRate},
@code{DefaultPitch}, and @code{DefaultVolume} settings in the @code{openttsd.conf} file.
Factory defaults are 0, 0, and 100 respectively.

The default language code is determined by the @code{DefaultLanguage} setting in
the @code{openttsd.conf} file.  Factory default is @code{en} (English).

The default output module is determined by the @code{LanguageDefaultModule}
setting in the @code{openttsd.conf} file.  Factory default is @code{flite}.

The default punctuation mode is determined by the @code{DefaultPunctuationMode}
setting in the @code{openttsd.conf} file.  Factory default is @code{none}.

@chapter Pipe Mode

In pipe mode (option @code{--pipe-mode} or @code{-e}), otts-say reads text from stdin, writes to stdout,
and also sends the text to OpenTTS.  Example:

@example
 $ cat README | otts-say -e
@end example

If a line begins with the characters
@emph{!-!}, the line is sent to OpenTTS as a SSIP command.  Example:

@example
 $ otts-say --pipe-mode
 The quality of mercy is not strained.
 !-!SET SELF VOICE FEMALE1
 It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
 Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest;
 !-!SET SELF RATE 50
 It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
 ^D
@end example

Note that each line of input is individually sent to OpenTTS, therefore
in the example above, the word @emph{heaven} is taken as the end of a sentence.
It should be possible to use other text filtering utilities, such as @code{tr}
or @code{fmt} to compensate.  For example, the following command would clean
up most cases:

@example
 $ cat INSTALL | fmt -u -w 1500 | otts-say -e
@end example

If the text itself contains @emph{!-!}, just make sure it is not at the start
of the line to prevent it from being interpreted as a SSIP command.  The following
sed command will do the job:

@example
 $ cat myfile | sed -e 's/^!-!/ !-!/g' - | otts-say -e
@end example

The input is sent to OpenTTS as fast as it will accept and queue it.
To wait for each line to be spoken, use the @code{--wait} or @code{-w} option.  Example:

@example
 $ otts-say --pipe-mode -w
 This line is spoken and processing waits for speaking to finish
 before this line is sent to OpenTTS.
 ^D
@end example

You can abort a long speech narative with the @code{--cancel} or @code{-C} option.

@example
 $ otts-say -C
@end example

@bye

@c otts-say.texi ends here

